adapter/metrics: design doc for Prometheus cluster metrics (#37524)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/developer/design/20260708_prometheus_cluster_metrics.md

Between SQL polling (which cannot survive envd unhealth or replica load) and raw registry handles (which cannot carry stable attribution), no existing path satisfies the requirements below.

## 3. Requirements

External observability of Materialize's internal state must:

1. **Survive envd unhealth.** Metrics must be scrapable when envd is unresponsive, restarting, or mid-0dt cutover. Prometheus scrape must not go through envd.
2. **Survive replica load / hydration.** When a replica is loading state or a worker is wedged, we must not silently serve stale values as fresh, and we must not block the scrape indefinitely.

> 3. **Carry stable attribution.** Emitted labels must be human-readable and stable across id churn (e.g. `object_name`, not raw `s12345`). Prometheus-side joins between metric families are explicitly not sufficient.

Reviewer: Elsewhere we use the collection ID, so a raw `s12345` would be acceptable. The problem is that otherwise we just have dataflow IDs, which have no counterpart in the rest of the system. Object names are not stable (can be renamed!)

> 4. **Expose a per-metric freshness signal.** Consumers must be able to distinguish "value is 0 because the collection is empty" from "value is 0 because the reporter is stuck." Alerting must be able to fire on the second within seconds.

Reviewer: I agree that there should be a freshness signal, but less certain about the value 0 part---it seems to be overly specific to some metrics. What'd happen in reality is that metrics update less than the sampling interval, causing us to read stale data as current. The last-updated metric would give us the chance to at least see this.

## 4. Non-goals

- **User-defined sink SQL** (`CREATE PROMETHEUS SINK` as a first-class user statement). All Prometheus sinks are built-ins written and reviewed by us. We do not intend to open this surface to users.

## 5. Proposal (high level)

> The requirements narrow the solution space to something that stores precomputed metrics in a prometheus endpoint in clusters. Squinting at this... a materialized view of metric state!

Reviewer: I'm not sure I follow the materialized view part. The metrics are in-memory and ephemeral, there's no reconciliation happening.

Author: I was being a bit coy and not formally technical here. I was trying to capture in my head the thing that clicked in the discussion to me.

> The proposal is for compute to run each metric's SQL view *continuously* as a normal compute dataflow, and attach a terminal sink operator that writes the view's output rows into a local Prometheus registry. Attribution happens inside SQL, where joins against the catalog are possible. Scrape reads these pre-computed values from local memory with no envd involvement. The dataflow's own progress watermark serves as a per-metric freshness signal for free.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposal is for compute to run each metric's SQL view *continually* as a normal compute dataflow, and attach a terminal sink operator that writes the view's output rows into a local Prometheus registry. Attribution happens inside SQL, where joins against the catalog are possible. Scrape reads these pre-computed values from local memory with no envd involvement. The dataflow's own progress watermark serves as a per-metric freshness signal for free.
```

Nit: continually vs. continuously.

> The proposal is for compute to run each metric's SQL view *continuously* as a normal compute dataflow, and attach a terminal sink operator that writes the view's output rows into a local Prometheus registry. Attribution happens inside SQL, where joins against the catalog are possible. Scrape reads these pre-computed values from local memory with no envd involvement. The dataflow's own progress watermark serves as a per-metric freshness signal for free.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The proposal is for compute to run each metric's SQL view *continuously* as a normal compute dataflow, and attach a terminal sink operator that writes the view's output rows into a local Prometheus registry. Attribution happens inside SQL, where joins against the catalog are possible. Scrape reads these pre-computed values from local memory with no envd involvement. The dataflow's own frontier serves as a per-metric freshness signal for free.
```

> To do this we would define a new ComputeSink, defined as a `BuiltinPrometheusSink` that pairs a SQL query with a Prometheus label/value schema. At replica create, the adapter passes the sink set to compute as part of `InstanceConfig`. Compute plans each sink's SQL through the existing query planner (similar to `BuiltinMaterializedView`), renders the resulting dataflow, and attaches a terminal `PrometheusSink` operator that writes into clusterd's local `MetricsRegistry`. Prometheus then scrapes clusterd's existing `/metrics` endpoint.

Reviewer: I agree in general, but `InstanceConfig` is the wrong place. The sinks are regular dataflows, so they need to go through the regular `CreateDataflow` mechanism, and can't exist as a special-case.

This resolves the requirements because:

- **(1) envd-down survival:** the scrape path is clusterd → Prometheus. Envd is not involved outside of the initial setup.
- **(2) load/hydration:** the dataflow's progress watermark advances as work completes; the sink can emit a last update `mz_prom_sink_last_update_seconds`. So when a worker stalls, the watermark freezes. Prometheus sees the last-good value plus the stale freshness metric.

> - **(3) attribution:** joins to `mz_objects` / `mz_clusters` etc. happen *inside* the dataflow, in SQL. Labels carry names, not ids.

Reviewer 2: Should we _also_ carry IDs? All the other builtin metrics carry IDs, so this one only carrying names would feel a bit weird

## 6. Proposed Design

### 6.1 The `BuiltinPrometheusSink` type

Proposed declaration of the metric using a prometheus sink:

```rust
pub static MZ_PROM_ARRANGEMENT_SIZES: BuiltinPrometheusSink = BuiltinPrometheusSink {
    name: "mz_prom_arrangement_sizes",
    schema: MZ_INTROSPECTION_SCHEMA,
    sql: "SELECT o.name AS object_name, ..., SUM(r.size) AS size_bytes

>           FROM mz_internal.mz_arrangement_sizes r JOIN mz_objects o ...",

Reviewer: Better: use [`mz_dataflow_arrangement_sizes`](https://materialize.com/docs/reference/system-catalog/mz_introspection/#mz_dataflow_arrangement_sizes).

3. **Ship in `InstanceConfig`:** the adapter adds a `prometheus_sinks: Vec<PromSinkConfig>` field alongside `logging: LoggingConfig` in `InstanceConfig`. Compute reads it during `CreateInstance` handling.
4. **Render per-replica:** the compute worker's boot sequence renders each sink's dataflow immediately after the logging dataflows initialize.
5. **Tear down cleanly:** replica drop propagates cancellation to sink dataflows through the same mechanism as user dataflows.

### 6.2 The v1 metric library

Seven sinks coming from the 10 metric families in `COMPUTE_METRIC_QUERIES` in `src/environmentd/src/http/prometheus.rs:275`.

| # | Sink name | Metric family | Labels | Source view | Value col |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| 1 | `mz_prom_arrangement_sizes` | `mz_arrangement_size_bytes`, `mz_arrangement_records`, `mz_arrangement_batches` | object, cluster, replica | `mz_arrangement_sizes` | 3 gauges |
| 2 | `mz_prom_arrangement_capacity` | `mz_arrangement_capacity_bytes` | (none, process-level) | `mz_arrangement_sizes` | 1 gauge |

> | 3 | `mz_prom_arrangement_allocations` | `mz_arrangement_allocation_count` | (none) | `mz_arrangement_sizes` | 1 gauge |

Reviewer: Do not surface capacity and allocations, they're becoming meaningless and I want to remove them eventually.

> | 4 | `mz_prom_park_duration` | `mz_compute_replica_park_duration_seconds_total` | (none) | `mz_scheduling_parks_histogram` | 1 counter |

Reviewer: `mz_timely_step_duration_seconds` already exists, and might be more informative. Depends on what we're looking for.

> | 5 | `mz_prom_peek_count` | `mz_compute_replica_peek_count` | (none) | `mz_active_peeks_per_worker` | 1 gauge |

Reviewer: Peek count: The environmentd is in a better position to track this. Also, if envd is unavailable, this is 0.

*We consolidated the 10 SQL queries down to 7 sinks by grouping related columns from the same source view.*

Each sink also automatically emits `mz_prom_sink_last_update_seconds{sink="<name>"}` for freshness alerting.

### 6.3 How this sink differs from existing compute sinks

Materialize has three compute sinks today: `Subscribe`, `MaterializedView`, and `CopyToS3Oneshot`. The Prometheus sink shares the same `SinkRender` trait shape, but differs in four ways.

1. **No downstream reader.** `Subscribe` pushes to a session, `MaterializedView` writes into persist, `CopyToS3Oneshot` uploads to a bucket. The Prometheus sink writes into an in-process `MetricsRegistry` that Prometheus pulls from over HTTP later. The sink's "output" is memory state, not an outgoing stream.
2. **No `as_of` / snapshot semantics.** `MaterializedView` and `CopyToS3Oneshot` care about a specific snapshot; `Subscribe` cares about what to backfill. A metrics sink just wants "the current state" continuously.
3. **No user-visible completion.** All three existing compute sinks eventually complete (subscribe closes, MV drops, `COPY` finishes). Prometheus sinks run for the lifetime of the replica.

> 4. **Not created by a user SQL statement.** `MaterializedView` and `Subscribe` are created by user DDL; `CopyToS3Oneshot` by `COPY TO`. Prometheus sinks are materialized from `BuiltinPrometheusSink` statics installed via `InstanceConfig` at replica create. The sink's `sink_id` is a system-generated `GlobalId`, and its `ComputeSinkDesc` is built by the adapter's bootstrap path rather than by a user-facing planner call.

Reviewer: Note that this will require a version bump to add new metrics sinks.

Two properties fall out for free:

- **Shared progress clock.** The sink dataflow, the joins, and the source `LogCollection` all advance under one clock inside the worker. When the worker wedges, all three stop together, so the freshness signal works without a separate heartbeat.
- **Retractions propagate naturally.** When a collection is dropped and its row in `mz_arrangement_sizes` is retracted, the sink sees a negative diff and removes the corresponding series. No separate cleanup pass is needed.

### 6.5 Failure isolation

Because the sink SQL is written by us as part of the database itself, we can constrain cardinality and query cost in our own code. So we favour fail-fast behaviour: the sink stops, the cluster keeps running, and that sink's metrics go dark until the next replica boot.

- **Cardinality** is bounded by the joins we chose (`|objects| × |clusters| × |replicas|` for a typical labelled sink).
- **Query cost** is a property of the SQL we write in `BuiltinPrometheusSink` statics.

One runtime concern remains: what happens when a sink's own dataflow fails?

- Sink panics should not fail replica creation.

> - Sink dataflows should not auto-restart. They stay crashed until the next replica boot.

Reviewer: There is no concept of restarting a dataflow. It has two error modes: We surface errors as regular data (although on a side channel), and a crash causes the replica to restart. It'll then render the exact same dataflow.

Each sink automatically emits two auxiliary series that cover complementary failure modes (see §6.5): `mz_prom_sink_last_update_seconds{sink="<name>"}` (liveness — is the sink running?), and `mz_prom_sink_errors_total{sink="<name>"}` (data-plane — is the sink's SQL producing errors?).

### 6.3 How this sink differs from existing compute sinks

Materialize has three compute sinks today: `Subscribe`, `MaterializedView`, and `CopyToS3Oneshot`. The Prometheus sink shares the same `SinkRender` trait shape, but differs in four ways.

1. **No downstream reader.** `Subscribe` pushes to a session, `MaterializedView` writes into persist, `CopyToS3Oneshot` uploads to a bucket. The Prometheus sink writes into an in-process `MetricsRegistry` that Prometheus pulls from over HTTP later. The sink's "output" is memory state, not an outgoing stream.
2. **No `as_of` / snapshot semantics.** `MaterializedView` and `CopyToS3Oneshot` care about a specific snapshot; `Subscribe` cares about what to backfill. A metrics sink just wants "the current state" continually.

> 3. **No user-visible completion.** All three existing compute sinks eventually complete (subscribe closes, MV drops, `COPY` finishes). Prometheus sinks run for the lifetime of the replica.

Reviewer: This statement contradicts the previous statement about the life cycle. From compute's perspective, it has a regular life cycle, only that adapter doesn't choose to ever drop the objects.

Author: I've cleaned it up. Thanks

### 6.5 Failure isolation and error surfacing

Because the sink SQL is written by us as part of the database itself, we can constrain cardinality and query cost in our own code.

- **Cardinality** is bounded by the joins we chose (`|objects| × |clusters| × |replicas|` for a typical labelled sink).
- **Query cost** is a property of the SQL we write in `BuiltinPrometheusSink` statics.

Two failure modes need separate signals, because the sink can only observe one of them from inside its own dataflow.

- **Data-plane errors (sink is running, SQL is producing errors).** SQL-level errors (division by zero, casts, etc.) flow through the standard compute error side channel. The `PrometheusSink` operator consumes both the OK and ERR streams from its input (the same shape `MaterializedView` uses when it writes OK/ERR shards to persist), emits gauges and counters from the OK stream, and increments `mz_prom_sink_errors_total{sink="<name>"}` for each error row. Alert on non-zero increment rate for this counter.

> - **Liveness (sink is not running at all).** If the dataflow never rendered, the worker is wedged, or the operator has crashed, nothing gets emitted, including the error counter. The freshness metric `mz_prom_sink_last_update_seconds{sink="<name>"}` covers this case: when the sink's frontier stops advancing the timestamp stops updating, so a staleness alert on that metric fires. This is the primary signal for "sink is broken."

Reviewer: If the dataflow isn't rendered, we also don't get the freshness metric. But then we have bigger problems to solve, so I don't think this is a failure scenario we have to handle in this context.

Author: Good point, addressed
